---
layout: post
title:  "[每日更新] Tracking the COVID-19 Outbreak and Signals of Containment"
date:   2020-03-24 08:00:00 +0800
categories: 
tags: 
---
**Any conclusion drawn from the data should be viewed with caution due to the dynamic nature of a pandemic and the adundant sources of bias associated with reporting.** 
I update every morning the COVID-19 situation in the US, Europe, and Asia, tracking both the outbreak and any emerging signal of containment. The intent of this blog is not to feed you daily news, but to present underlying trends and perspectives worth considering when you are watching the news. The graphs in this blog are best viewed on a Laptop browser. Latest update: {{ site.time | date: '%B %d, %Y' }}. 

## 1. Prognosis
- **United States**
    - While it may seem like the increase of new cases is slowing down [(20%)](#Percentage Change), that might be because the testing centres have reached their maximum processing capacity. The number of tests pending results hovers around 60,000 for the last six days. 
    - There is a slight upward trend in the case fatality rate (CFR), likely due to an increasingly overwhelmed healthcare system. 
    - On the upside, though, people are actively protecting themselves now as the [google search](#Google Search Interest) for "mask" is at an all-time high. 
- **Europe**
    + The containment efforts are taking effect as the number of daily confirmed cases is increasing at a [slower rate every day](#Percentage Change), with Italy, the slowest, at 6.5%, and Spain, the fastest, at 13%. 
    + The Italian healthcare system is still facing a grave challenge, with the case fatality rate (CFR) currently at 12% and still increasing. Spain seems to be heading [in the same direction](#case fatality rate) with a 8.8% CFR. Germany, on the other hand, fares well in this regard and manages to record only a 1% fatality rate. Note, though, there are caveats to reporting naive CFR which I explain below. 
- **Asia**
    + Most of Asia still seem to have the outbreak under control, especially in places like China, Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and South Korea. 
    + There's been a surge in the number of imported cases and sporadic domestic clusters. Governments have imposed stricter quarantine procedures and social distancing measures since then.


## 2. Signals of Containment
<a name="Percentage Change"></a>
### Percentage Change
Look out for the 7-day moving average of the percentage change in confirmed cases reported. It is important to see both the current percentage change and its trend. To easily classify the situation, we can use the following scale[^percentage]:
- $$r > 100\%$$: **Rapidly increasing**. The total number of cases is doubling everyday.
- $$10\% < r < 100\%$$: **Increasing**. 
- $$1\% < r < 10\%$$: **Slowly increasing**.
- $$r < 1\%$$: **Under control**. There is almost no new case reported.
<iframe width="696" height="431.99999999999994" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=1897242208&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

#### Things to Note
- Japan had a turning point on 23rd March where the increase of cases started accelerating. Coincidently (or maybe not), Japan and I.O.C. officially anounced the [postponement of Tokyo 2020](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/24/sports/olympics/coronavirus-summer-olympics-postponed.html) on the next day.
- Italy has dipped down to the below-10% region, but nowhere near under-control yet. Germany, Spain and Switzerland seem to be following suit.
- The rates in China and Singapore are slowing, too, likely due to heightened arrival restriction and control. 

<a name="Google Search Interest"></a>
### Google Search Interest
This figure tells us how many people in the US are searching for keywords such as "hand sanitizer" or "symptom". I suspect that as the community spread of the virus is being contained, we can expect to see a drop in searches for words like "symptom" and "influenza", similar to the trends shown in Singapore.
<iframe width="696" height="432" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=783455223&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>
<iframe width="696" height="432" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=196247116&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>


<a name="US Testing Numbers"></a>
### US Testing Numbers
As the containment takes effect, we expect to see the number of positive and negative tests stabilize, and the number of tests pending result drops. As you can see, we are not there yet.
<iframe width="696" height="432" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=481777218&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

Confirmed Cases
---
<iframe width="696.0000000000001" height="432" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=967719983&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>
<!--<iframe width="696" height="432" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=1124767386&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>-->


Death Cases
---
<a name="case fatality rate"></a>
<iframe width="696" height="432" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=366153234&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>
<iframe width="696" height="432" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vQnqDux0h60qbKyhlYff1YMpjwhPZA694IOW4ixe0XNFi-JUHjXxJ69AFIGXajrBURwUKW2FnELgE1C/pubchart?oid=709712852&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

- How does selection bias affect CFR?
> [In Italy], a change in strategy on Feb 25 limited testing to patients who had severe signs and symptoms also resulted in a 19% positive rate (21,157 of 109,170 tested as of Mar 14) and an apparent increase in the death rate—from 3.1% on Feb 24 to 7.2% on Mar 17—patients with milder illness were no longer tested.  In the UK, only patients deemed ill enough to require at least one night in hospital met the criteria for a Covid-19 test. 
> 
> CFR rates are subject to selection bias as more severe cases are tested, generally those in the hospital settings or those with more severe symptoms. The number of currently infected asymptomatics is uncertain: estimates put it at least a half are asymptomatic; the proportion not coming forward for testing is also highly doubtful (i.e. you are symptomatic, but you do not present for testing). Therefore we can assume the IFR is significantly lower than the CFR.

- When is CFR accurate?
>Iceland’s higher rates of testing, the smaller population, and their ability to ascertain all those with Sars-CoV-2  means they can obtain. an accurate estimate of the CFR and the infection fatality rate (IFR) during the pandemic (most countries will only be able to do this after the pandemic). Current data from Iceland suggests their IFR is somewhere between 0.01% and 0.19%.

The bottom line is, CFR is probably **inflated** in many countries and IFR is **much lower** than CFR.


## Additional Resources
#### Websites
1. **Bloomberg**: [Mapping the Coronavirus Outbreak Across the World](https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2020-coronavirus-cases-world-map/?srnd=premium-asia)
2. **Johns Hopkins University**: [Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases](https://gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6)
3. **US Testing Numbers**: [The COIVD Tracking Project](https://covidtracking.com/)
4. **Global MediXchange**: [Handbook of COVID-19 Prevention and Treatment](https://www.alibabacloud.com/universal-service/pdf_reader?spm=a3c0i.14138300.8102420620.dreadnow.646d647fDWbsii&cdnorigin=video-intl&pdf=Read%20Online-Handbook%20of%20COVID-19%20Prevention%20and%20Treatment.pdf)

#### Articles
1. [Before Virus Outbreak, a Cascade of Warnings Went Unheeded](https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/19/us/politics/trump-coronavirus-outbreak.html), March 19, 2020
2. [To Fight a Fast-Moving Pandemic, Get a Faster Hospital](https://www.citylab.com/life/2020/03/coronavirus-cases-france-train-hospital-tgv-covid-19-patient/608833/), MARCH 26, 2020
3. [Spain, Europe’s worst-hit country after Italy, says coronavirus tests it bought from China are failing to detect positive cases](https://www.businessinsider.sg/coronavirus-spain-says-rapid-tests-sent-from-china-missing-cases-2020-3?_ga=2.212074516.1285585527.1585620210-963085568.1583747541&r=US&IR=T), March 26, 2020
4. [Why Is Germany's Coronavirus Death Rate So Low?](https://time.com/5812555/germany-coronavirus-deaths/), March 30, 2020


Footnotes
----
[^percentage]: The percentage only indicates a relative change. The actual number of new cases reported in each country may be very different, as it depends on the absolute number of cumulative cases in that country. 